(upbeat music)
All right, let's learn about events,
and event listeners and how to listen for them and how
to do stuff when things happen.
So dumb elements, things that are on the page,
they emit events, so when they're clicked,
when they're hovered, when they're dragged,
they will fire off, they will emit events
when they are interacted with.
We can use the event listeners
to listen for when these events happen,
and do something, and react to them.
So you can attach event listeners to all elements,
and you can also attach them
to the document as well as the window.
So let's start with a button,
because that's the most common.
We'll go to events.html.
I'm in the 29 events folder here.
And give ourselves a button with the class of butts.
Yeah, I did it.
Apologies if you're using this course.
(laughs) Sometimes people use these courses in school,
so hopefully that is appropriate for school.
Let's put something in there, "Click Me!"
Then let's make a new JavaScript file
if it's not already there.
We'll call it events.js.
Console log, "It works!!!"
Go down here.
Script source, and hook to events.js.
K. Open it up.
It works!
Gotta click me button, and you click it, nothing happens.
Good. Now, in order
to listen for events on elements, you first need
to go and off and get them, so we can select them.
Const, button.
Well, let's call it butts.
It goes document.queryselector('butts').
And then we take our butts. (laughs)
This is a good idea.
We take our butts, button, and we use the method called
.addEventListener, so butts.addEventListener,
and add event listener will take two arguments, usually.
There's possibility for three,
I'll talk about that in a second,
but usually two arguments first.
What is the type of events that you want to listen to?
For some reason it's recommending fullscreenchange,
which is an event when a video player goes full screen.
Maybe I was using that when I
was coding my course platform earlier.
But the event we want to listen to is obviously click.
That is probably the most common event
that you are going to be using.
And the second thing that you need
to pass is what's called a callback function,
now woo! Buzzword!
Buzzword alert.
So a callback function is just a regular function.
This is not a special type of function.
It's not like we learned about named functions,
anonymous functions and arrow functions.
It's not a new type of function called callback,
it's just a word we use to describe a function that we pass
to a method that will then be called
at a later point in time.
A callback function is just a regular function,
but instead of us calling the function,
we provide the name, or reference to a function
to addEventListener, and then the browser will take care
of calling or running that function for us when it needs to.
It's similar to saying, sort of like,
"Hey browser, I made this function.
"When somebody clicks on my butts button,
"can you please do me a favor and run it for me?
"Thanks a lot."
So probably the most common way, I don't know if
this is the most common, it's what I see a lot.
And this is what is referred
to as an anonymous callback function.
So what people will do
is they'll just write the word function in here.
And you don't give it a name.
We'll talk about the parameters in just a second,
then you open and close the function body right here.
So this is an argument, it might look a little bit funky
because this is now multiple lines,
but the second argument to addEventListener
is just a function.
And inside of that function, we can do whatever it is
that we want when the thing gets clicked,
so in our case, we'll console log,
"IT GOT CLICKED!!!"
Go ahead and now when we click on it,
you see that the call back function gets run once
for every single time that user has clicked it.
Sort of a little aside, it will also run it.
You see what I did there, is I hit tab to focus that button,
and then I used my enter key.
So that means that you don't necessarily need
to think about keyboard events as well
if you're thinking about your standard buttons,
and people hitting enter on them instead of clicking them.
So that's the basics so an event listener.
You take something, (chuckles)
when I used to teach event listeners in person,
we would always say there's three steps.
Go get something, listen for something,
which is your click, and then do something.
So go get something, listen for something,
and then go ahead and do something.
There's a lot more to event listeners,
so let's dive into that now.
I said before that this is an anonymous function,
and that is because there's no name to this function,
there's no way for us to reference
this function outside of here.
We simply just pass an anonymous function,
and then write the code that we wish to have.
However, we can also create a named function outside
of this, and pass it in as a reference,
so what I often like to do is, before I do the listening,
I'll make a function called, handleClick,
and that naming handle whatever, is not necessarily
just like a best practice or anything,
but it's often something that I'll do in my functions,
is I'll just name, I'll name the callbacks,
I'll start them with "Handle," and then that tells me
that it's a specific function that gets passed in
to an event handler.
And then we can move that console log up inside of here.
Now instead of passing an anonymous function,
you can just pass it, reference to the function names,
so we'll say handleClick, right?
That is pretty simple because we've made
a function called handleClick,
we can probably call it ourselves from here, right?
If we just type in handleClick, it's available there.
And then we've taken the name of the function and given it
to our event listener, and say,
"Hey can you call this for me,
"when somebody clicks me? Thanks a lot."
You'll notice, and I see this a lot,
where people think like, "Why isn't it like that?"
Like, "Why am I not running
"the function inside of here, right?"
And if we refresh the page now,
you see that it runs on page load.
So unless this function were to return another function,
which is something that can happen,
we've already let that that.
You do actually have to call the function yourself.
Why? Because the browser
will call it for us.
The browser will run the function for us,
we simply just say, "Here's the function.
"You do you.
"You do what you want (chuckles)
"when it's time to go ahead."
So what benefit does having
this function outside of the event listener have?
Well there's a couple things, so if we have another button.
Let's make another button, so "button.cool",
and "Click me also!"
If we wanna listen for that another one,
so "cool", and maybe I'll say "cool button,"
and then we can just basically duplicate this,
replace it with "cool button,"
and we can also listen on the cool button.
So now, doesn't matter which one I click,
both of them are referring to that same function.
If this was anonymous,
and I had written a function for both of them,
and here I console log "IT GOT CLICKED".
That doesn't seem like that big of a deal,
but you can think about scaling it up to
a whole bunch of stuff.
I've certainly have seen lots
of developers in the past do this.
Then you need to update what happens on a click,
you gotta make sure
that you have referenced every single one,
and that's not being a very dry programmer, of,
don't repeat yourself.
So we are going to just pass
in reference to the function like that.
And then any time that we wanna change it,
we wanna add a bug.
Little button that ardd, event listener,
addEventListener, there we go.
You see that obviously it's gonna be updated for every one.
So that is the first benefit, of it's dry,
and then the second thing is that if you want to remove
an event listener from an element,
you must have referenced to the function.
So, if I want to go to this butts,
and call removeEventListener, it works exactly the same
where you have to first, give it references to what event
do you wanna stop listening for?
And now that's not enough.
You can't just say, "Stop listening for all clicks."
That's not possible with the removeEventListener.
That's actually a very difficult thing to implement.
I know jQuery does it sort of behind the scenes,
but they have to keep reference to all the functions,
so in our case you have to pass the event you wish to stop
listening for, as well as the function which you wish
to stop listening for as well,
so in our case it's going to be handleClick.
So now, when I run it, nothing is actually running it.
We can even just maybe we'll just copy that, comment it out.
See, it clicks, and if I paste it in,
it no longer, it's called unbinding,
by the way that's another buzzword.
"Binding," what does that mean?
Well, a binding essentially means, taking a function
and listening for a specific click against an element,
so this function is bound that element.
This function is bound that element,
and when you take it off,
you're unbinding that function from that element.
So removing event listener, if you wanna remove it,
you must have referenced to the original function.
If we had done an anonymous function,
so function, over here let's say,
console log, "Im an anon!"
See? "Im an anon."
We couldn't take our butts,
and remove the click handler from it.
See even if I pass it reference to another function,
the anon functions still works.
And even if I path it, this exact same function, like this,
even though it's the exact same contents,
it's an anonymous function with the same console log inside,
it doesn't work.
And that's because there's no way
to reference the actual function that we were removing.
It's just not possible.
So, if you ever in the future need
to remove an event listener, you must use a named function,
or an arrow function, that is stored in a variable,
so that you can then reference and unbind it.
Anonymous functions cannot be removed.
Let me just show you real quick how you
do it with an arrow function as well.
So const,
hooray, is equal to an arrow function.
I'll just console.log, "HOORAY!"
And then in our case,
let's move this one back to handleClick.
If we take our cool button,
we can just reference the hooray function that we stored
in a variable.
So that technically is an anonymous function,
but because we've stored it in a variable, it will infer
the name of the function from the variable name,
and we can still reference it,
because it's stuck in a variable, and watch.
So now hooray works just fine.
Now that is the basics of event listeners,
we're going to go into what are
the other events that are out there as well as
how can we create our own custom events,
'cause a really handy thing is to be able
to emit a buy button, or a buy event,
or you wanna emit a success event, or something like that.
It's really handy to be able to just emit your own events,
so that you can then listen to them,
just like you're listening to regular clicks.
So we're gonna go into that,
but for now we're going
to move into listening for events on multiple items.
And this is an extremely common thing, you've got a list
of 40 buttons on the page, or any time you come across
a specific type of button, or any time you come across
a specific type of image,
or anything like that,
you want to listen for the event on all of those things
that are on the page.
So the way that that works is that,
you can't just take an array of elements
that you have selected,
so maybe we'll go down here,
and I'm going to give myself a button with the class of buy.
And I, we'll say "Buy Item 1."
And I actually want like ten of those.
So I can use my Emmet here.
Button.buy,
and the test will be "Buy Item $,"
and I want 10 of those.
So I'm using Emmet here to expand to expand to ten,
(exclaims) that was cool, hey?
10 buttons, all of them have a class of buy,
maybe I'll just put a h2 there.
"Buy buttons!"
there we go, so we've got all of these buttons here,
now how am I going to listen for a click on all of them?
It doesn't make sense to have to select all ten of them
and attach to event listener 10 times,
that's actually what we're doing,
but there's a much more efficient way.
Let's put a comment here.
"Listen on multiple items."
And the first thing we wanna do is select all of those,
const, buy buttons, is equal to document.querySelectorAll.
What's the difference between
querySelector and querySelectorAll?
querySelectorAll will select multiple,
whereas querySelector will just give you the first match
of the raw element, so anything with
the class of buy, right?
Maybe a button with the class of buy.
Then let's console log that.
"buyButtons."
You see we get a node list,
which is a list of all of the buttons
that match that's, right?
It's 10 things.
So, that's good, and you might think,
"Why can't we just go ahead, and take our buy buttons,
"and add an event listener of click?"
And maybe we'll make a function here.
Function.buyItem.
Console.log('BUYING ITEM')
Pass a buy,
item function to it, right?
So we have our elements, we listened for them,
we listened for a click, and then when that,
something clicks on each of those, you run the buy item.
So here we go.
(mimics buzzer) "Buy buttons at add event listener
"is not a function."
Oh. So what it's
telling us there is that, the buy buttons doesn't
have the method addEventListener.
Well, let's console.log the buy buttons.
Open it up, if you ever wanna see what all
of the different methods are,
you can actually look in the prototype.
Again, we haven't about the whoa!
We haven't learned about that yet,
but we will in the future,
and you see that the methods available for us
are item entries for each keys, and values.
There's no .addEventListener, whereas,
if I were to console.log the butts button,
I guess we gotta console.dir the button,
so let's see what's in it.
You will see that, somewhere in here,
I don't know where, it's huge,
somewhere in there is addEventListener,
which is a method on that specific element,
so in order to attach event listeners to multiple events,
you actually must loop over and
for each element attach it individually.
Now we haven't learned about loops just yet,
but I think that we can handle this just fine.
Remember we talked about this buyButtons?
And in the prototype, there is a method called forEach?
That is going to allow us to loop over each of the items.
So what we can is, get rid of all of this,
we'll take our buy buttons.
Wait, did I delete the querySelector?
Yeah, there we go.
Usually what I'll do is I'll put this selector at the top
of my file, not just kinda anywhere inside of it,
so it probably belongs a little bit more up here,
and that's what we're gonna be doing in all of our samples,
but for the sake of seeing all of the code in this example,
we're gonna keep it right here,
and there's nothing wrong with doing that,
just kind of our personal preferance.
So we have our buyButtons, we're going to take them,
and call the .forEach method on it.
Now, forEach is a method that will run
a function for each item in our node list,
so we can go ahead and pass an anonymous functions,
that's pretty common when you're doing looping,
it's just passing an anonymous function,
because there's, we don't have the same limitations
of having to remove them like an event listener.
And then that function is going to give you a argument
that is each of the individual items,
and we can name that whatever we want,
so we'll say, we'll call it, "buyButton", singular, right?
And that is just a parameter, that is just a placeholder
and the browser will pass us a viable called buyButton
when it runs it for us, and then we can go ahead and
console.log the buyButton, singular.
Now, when you run that,
you'll see that we have this logged out 10 times.
Anything I put in here will happen 10 times, right?
See, this says "hey" 10 times over,
so this function is, we're just passing it
a function that it will run once
for everything that it found,
and then it will also give us reference
to the individual element in here.
Now we have the individual elements that are on the page,
and we can use that addEventListener method
that we talked about.
So let's console.log inside of here,
"Binding the buy button."
That should run 10 times, good.
And then we'll take the buyButton.addEventListener,
it'll listen for a click,
and when someone does click that,
we can either pass an anonymous function, or
we can just pass it the reference to this buyItem function,
so we'll do that.
"buyItem".
Now when I refresh the page,
you see, every single one of those elements,
even though it just took me a couple lines of code,
every single one of those elements
has been bound individually.
Similarly, if you want to remove the eventListener
from each of those, you have to loop over them as well.
Now a couple things here.
I've already noted this, but I know this is a big hurdle,
and we've gone over this a bit,
is this parameter here can be named anything we want.
If we were to move this function outside,
so let's go up here actually.
Let's have a function called handleBuyButtonClick.
And the handleBuyButtonClick is gonna give us the buyButton.
And then what we can do,
is we can move this code up into this function.
And simply pass it
instead of doing an anonymous function like this,
pass it reference to the function that we wanted to call.
So handle buy button, click whoa!
(laughs) handleBuyButtonClick.
So now we've made this a named function,
you still maybe asking for like,
"Where does this come from?
"Where is the buyButton coming from?
"I don't understand."
Well this can be named anything we want,
because it is a parameter, or a placeholder,
that we're not supplying it, the browser is supplying it.
The browser will run this function for us,
and it knows that it will pass you the first argument
that is the element that got clicked.
So for us, we call it buyButton,
but we could call this "anythingWeWant".
Oh, and you can't have exclamation marks in it.
That's the only one.
So you notice here, I changed it to anythingWeWant.
It changed to anythingWeWant there.
It will still work.
I can go ahead and name it "oprah"
and it still works, right?
As long as your parameter is named whatever you want it
to be and you reference it whatever you need
to be the parameter.
Other things here,
you will often see people use arrow functions as well
for the handler, so maybe it'll say buyButtons.forEach
and then you'll see somebody give yourself
an arrow function,
which is the button and then they will
open up the curly brackets.
Say button.addEventListener('click',
and then here you can even use another arrow function.
Console.log('YOU CLICKED IT')
Right?
You see when I save it, it gets rid of these parentheses
because there's only one argument, so it's not necessary
to have that.
And that will work, just as well.
So arrow functions work just as fine.
Again, the only downside to using an arrow function here
for your addEventListner is that you cannot unbind it,
because it's an anonymous function in this case.
I think that's enough for this video.
In the next video, we're gonna jump into a very big topic
which is the event object,
so when a handler does get called,
like handleClick,
we actually get this thing called an event.
And the event has all kind of information.
So we'll get into that in the next video.